# Siren

## Properties

Name | Type | Description | Notes
------------ | ------------- | ------------- | -------------
**availability** | Option<[**Vec<crate::models::AlarmControlPanelAvailabilityInner>**](AlarmControlPanel_availability_inner.md)> | A list of MQTT topics subscribed to receive availability (online/offline) updates. Must not be used together with `availability_topic`. | [optional]
**availability_mode** | Option<**String**> | When `availability` is configured, this controls the conditions needed to set the entity to `available`. Valid entries are `all`, `any`, and `latest`. If set to `all`, `payload_available` must be received on all configured availability topics before the entity is marked as online. If set to `any`, `payload_available` must be received on at least one configured availability topic before the entity is marked as online. If set to `latest`, the last `payload_available` or `payload_not_available` received on any configured availability topic controls the availability. (Default: `latest)` | [optional]
**availability_template** | Option<**String**> | Defines a [template](/docs/configuration/templating/#using-templates-with-the-mqtt-integration) to extract device's availability from the `availability_topic`. To determine the devices's availability result of this template will be compared to `payload_available` and `payload_not_available`. | [optional]
**availability_topic** | Option<**String**> | The MQTT topic subscribed to receive availability (online/offline) updates. Must not be used together with `availability`. | [optional]
**available_tones** | Option<**Vec<String>**> | A list of available tones the siren supports. When configured, this enables the support for setting a `tone` and enables the `tone` state attribute. | [optional]
**command_template** | Option<**String**> | Defines a [template](/docs/configuration/templating/#using-templates-with-the-mqtt-integration) to generate a custom payload to send to `command_topic`. The variable `value` will be assigned with the configured `payload_on` or `payload_off` setting. The siren turn on service parameters `tone`, `volume_level` or `duration` can be used as variables in the template. When operation in optimistic mode the corresponding state attributes will be set. Turn on parameters will be filtered if a device misses the support. | [optional]
**command_off_template** | Option<**String**> | Defines a [template](/docs/configuration/templating/#using-templates-with-the-mqtt-integration) to generate a custom payload to send to `command_topic` when the siren turn off service is called. By default `command_template` will be used as template for service turn off. The variable `value` will be assigned with the configured `payload_off` setting. | [optional]
**command_topic** | Option<**String**> | The MQTT topic to publish commands to change the siren state. Without command templates, a default JSON payload like `{\"state\":\"ON\", \"tone\": \"bell\", \"duration\": 10, \"volume_level\": 0.5 }` is published. When the siren turn on service is called, the startup parameters will be added to the JSON payload. The `state` value of the JSON payload will be set to the the `payload_on` or `payload_off` configured payload.  | [optional]
**device** | Option<[**crate::models::ButtonDevice**](Button_device.md)> |  | [optional]
**enabled_by_default** | Option<**bool**> | Flag which defines if the entity should be enabled when first added. (Default: `true)` | [optional]
**encoding** | Option<**String**> | The encoding of the payloads received and published messages. Set to `\"\"` to disable decoding of incoming payload. (Default: `utf-8)` | [optional]
**entity_category** | Option<**String**> | The [category](https://developers.home-assistant.io/docs/core/entity#generic-properties) of the entity. (Default: `None)` | [optional]
**json_attributes_template** | Option<**String**> | Defines a [template](/docs/configuration/templating/#using-templates-with-the-mqtt-integration) to extract the JSON dictionary from messages received on the `json_attributes_topic`. Usage example can be found in [MQTT sensor](/integrations/sensor.mqtt/#json-attributes-template-configuration) documentation. | [optional]
**json_attributes_topic** | Option<**String**> | The MQTT topic subscribed to receive a JSON dictionary payload and then set as sensor attributes. Usage example can be found in [MQTT sensor](/integrations/sensor.mqtt/#json-attributes-topic-configuration) documentation. | [optional]
**name** | Option<**String**> | The name to use when displaying this siren. Can be set to `null` if only the device name is relevant. (Default: `MQTT Siren)` | [optional]
**object_id** | Option<**String**> | Used instead of `name` for automatic generation of `entity_id` | [optional]
**optimistic** | Option<**bool**> | Flag that defines if siren works in optimistic mode. (Default: ``true` if no `state_topic` defined, else `false`.)` | [optional]
**payload_available** | Option<**String**> | The payload that represents the available state. (Default: `online)` | [optional]
**payload_not_available** | Option<**String**> | The payload that represents the unavailable state. (Default: `offline)` | [optional]
**payload_off** | Option<**String**> | The payload that represents `off` state. If specified, will be used for both comparing to the value in the `state_topic` (see `value_template` and `state_off` for details) and sending as `off` command to the `command_topic`. (Default: `OFF)` | [optional]
**payload_on** | Option<**String**> | The payload that represents `on` state. If specified, will be used for both comparing to the value in the `state_topic` (see `value_template` and `state_on`  for details) and sending as `on` command to the `command_topic`. (Default: `ON)` | [optional]
**qos** | Option<**i32**> | The maximum QoS level to be used when receiving and publishing messages. | [optional]
**retain** | Option<**bool**> | If the published message should have the retain flag on or not. | [optional]
**state_off** | Option<**String**> | The payload that represents the `off` state. Used when value that represents `off` state in the `state_topic` is different from value that should be sent to the `command_topic` to turn the device `off`. (Default: ``payload_off` if defined, else `'OFF'`)` | [optional]
**state_on** | Option<**String**> | The payload that represents the `on` state. Used when value that represents `on` state in the `state_topic` is different from value that should be sent to the `command_topic` to turn the device `on`. (Default: ``payload_on` if defined, else `'ON'`)` | [optional]
**state_topic** | Option<**String**> | The MQTT topic subscribed to receive state updates. The state update may be either JSON or a simple string. When a JSON payload is detected, the `state` value of the JSON payload should supply the `payload_on` or `payload_off` defined payload to turn the siren on or off. Additionally, the state attributes `duration`, `tone` and `volume_level` can be updated. Use `value_template` to transform the received state udpate to a compliant JSON payload. Attributes will only be set if the function is supported by the device and a valid value is supplied. When a non JSON payload is detected, it should be either of the `payload_on` or `payload_off` defined payloads or `None` to reset the siren's state to `unknown`. The initial state will be `unknown`. The state will be reset to `unknown` if a `None` payload or `null` JSON value is received as a state update. | [optional]
**state_value_template** | Option<**String**> | Defines a [template](/docs/configuration/templating/#using-templates-with-the-mqtt-integration) to extract device's state from the `state_topic`. To determine the siren's state result of this template will be compared to `state_on` and `state_off`. Alternatively `value_template` can be used to render to a valid JSON payload. | [optional]
**support_duration** | Option<**bool**> | Set to `true` if the MQTT siren supports the `duration` service turn on parameter and enables the `duration` state attribute. (Default: `true)` | [optional]
**support_volume_set** | Option<**bool**> | Set to `true` if the MQTT siren supports the `volume_set` service turn on parameter and enables the `volume_level` state attribute. (Default: `true)` | [optional]
**unique_id** | Option<**String**> | An ID that uniquely identifies this siren device. If two sirens have the same unique ID, Home Assistant will raise an exception. | [optional]

[[Back to Model list]](../README.md#documentation-for-models) [[Back to API list]](../README.md#documentation-for-api-endpoints) [[Back to README]](../README.md)


